But this was the sort of thing that was going on.
And so we didn't have any books.
You know, immediately we decided, well, the best thing to do is learn something about the history.
But we didn't have any books of history.
And my teacher, you know, he said, well, these are the books that are important.
Go out and find them.
And then I went to India and looked around India for twenty years.
until we could find those books.
This was Deshing Rinpoche, who was a great historian.
But we didn't have any books.
So there we had the lamas, who could have taught us, but no books.
And this is, you had early 70s or so?
This was the 60s.
60s.
Early 60s.
And all these Tibetan lamas come to New Delhi.
They have one estate.
He just opened the door.
And he said, oh, you can't sleep here with six, seven, ten people.
When I was up there, like ten, anything like that.
But the very interesting thing is that his second teacher was called, he's all in Tingu Chintze, a dean teacher, and I took Gene's letter to him, and he said, you know, when I think about it, Gene, it's a shame you, he said, you can't look better than him.
And he become also sort of such a good,
He knows Tibetan extremists, 100% he knows.
Therefore, he knows which tradition... I mean, all this...
Tell me a little bit, if you don't mind, about your own background.
How did you become expert on
Well, I was just serious teaching for something that would keep me out of the draft.
Well, are you—yeah, you worked for Elsie.
Were you a librarian?
Were you a scholar?
No, I'm not a librarian.
My field is basically—it was area studies in the old days when you didn't have to have a discipline.
And I was interested in Asia as an area.
Thank you.
Tibetan and Mongolian, Turkish were my peers.
And there was this opportunity when the Rockefeller Foundation set up this, the Rockefeller project.
They brought, you know, incredible llamas to various places, and really provided Philip to the development of Tibetan studies in the West.
So you were actually over there before you went to work for the L.C.?
Oh, yeah.
I was hired locally.
And then the Library of Congress was interested in this project.
You know, we had good support from people like Dan Borst and, you know, Jim Billington.
I interviewed both.
Yeah.
So both of them were very supportive, and they understood the value of projects like this.
Did they see it as a gathering for the Library of Congress or as an opportunity to preserve literature?
I mean, as a...
Yes, I mean, that's the mission of the Library of Congress.
It's a world library.
And this was an opportunity that was made possible by the fact that we had those resources.
They said, go for it.
Well, I think in a hundred years, British expedition went in Tibet, in the British, went in Tibet's army, but they brought out enormous Tibetan liberty, out from Tibet,
the time when they took, everybody said, you stole it from Tibet, but if Britain, they didn't bring it from out to Europe, during the Cultural Revolution, it would be destroyed the whole thing.
So now here, and they try to get copies, give it to the Tibet people.
So therefore, the second thing you're coming into the West is not just the sort of only they bring it in here, sort of really preserve it externally.
So therefore, a lab and machine is not just picking out a pinch from somewhere else, but
coming over here so safe.
I mean, you know, the two floors we have absolutely looking up.
So there's a thousand, thousand fans looking up, no other places.
So therefore not exactly pinching or machining anything like they preserve.
That's what I find myself.
And now's the time for the things to migrate back to the people that they can't, to whom they're the heritage.
Which things?
These things?
Yeah.
Copies, originals, they should go back.
Go back to Tibet?
Well, go back to Tibet when it's inappropriate.
To Tibetans in the diaspora.
The idea is to make them available.
A perfect example is, for example, at the University of Virginia.
Many graduate students go over with Fulbright scholarships to India to study a particular text.
And they'll do a preliminary investigation contact.
Someone says, I want to study this text.
And half the time, they'll say, we'd love to teach you, but we don't have this text anymore.
Texts that were printed in India over the past 35 years are now missing in India.
They don't even have them in the Excel communities anymore.
And so many times, the graduate students will say, well, listen, I'll bring over 20 copies of this text.
I'll just make 20 photocopies.
And you can keep them if you'll read this text with me.
What would you call this place?
Is this a repository?
Repository.
taking care of the material in trust until such time?
That's my idea.
Right now, people come here.
I don't know, we have an enormous photocopying bill each.
How many photocopies has Mr. Karma made?
Thirty books.
Thirty books?
At this very gathering, I'm coming all the way from India, and so Karma's coming all the way from Bhutan.
And Rumbu's coming all the way from England, to here.
And here we have all the way from China, from Chengdu.
And part of the reason is because of Gene.
Gene knows the contents of every single one of these books.
Gene, single-handedly.
So is he known in all these places?
Yes, he knows.
He's the honey.
Where the bee?
If there's honey, there's bee.
That's as fast as my bees.
So even around the country, there may be a dozen collections like this.
But without someone who knows the content, people can come in the door and say, Gene, I'm doing research on this.
And he says, well, and he'll just pull a book off the shelf and say, here's... Give me just a wild example of some kind of research.
Just a subject.
I mean, example, Sheen.
Mr. Sheen, he tried it.
Did you remember?
And then at one point, it's pretty good.
The second, third, slowly, slowly, hardly everybody knows.
It's really Gene.
I think if Gene was here,
I've never seen books like this, but can you tell me what I'm looking at?
What do you call those cloth coverings?
These are called pere.
How do we spell that?
P-E-R-E-Y, I guess.
It means just book wrappers.
All books should be wrapped.
They shouldn't be left on the shelf.
These are very messy because we don't have a skilled wrapper.
The end flaps.
Why don't you get that Dorje Cieba?
There's a Dorje Cieba there.
Is that the one you showed me?
No, is there something significant about the color?
I mean, does red?
No.
It just happens.
It doesn't matter, right?
It's kind of traditional, the monastic colors.
Is it cotton?
Whatever.
Sometimes silk, if they're especially precious texts.
Obviously, the silk is much more expensive.
The flaps that you see at the end are the equivalent of spine labels.
Right.
Do they call them books?
Are they called books?
That's the translation.
How do you spell it?
P-E-C-H-A.
Now, this is a great lama who I had known for a long time.
We're talking about this book.
Yeah, this is a typical, this is how a Tibetan book goes.
This is one of the most famous texts in the Tibetan tradition, the Diamond Cutter Sutra.
This shows the typical Tibetan thing.
You have the wrapper.
This is not really meant to be red.
It's a—it's what's called a sungta— Just so that doesn't get my picture, this is just too bad.
Thank you.
It's a—it's a—a text that was calligraphed by a great teacher for a student, and then it was passed from the teacher.
I didn't think the teacher was a—he was a great scholar, but his calligraphy leaves something to be desired.
Now, how do you know all of this history?
Is this contained?
Because it was a, it was what's called Sumtenaran Nangan.
And it was given to me as a relic, almost.
Where was this?
This was in India, years ago.
It's calligraphed by a great eighteenth-century lama, Geetse Mahapandita.
And Gita Mahapandita calligraphed this for one of his students.
And it was passed down in the family from the time of the... Can I put this?
The picture's too big.
I just want to get the background stuff in there.
Oh, that's exquisite.
But, you know, it's not meant really as a book.
It's more of a relic.
We have hundreds of copies of the same text.
Do you think it looks like Geto Mahapanita?
Poor guy, he didn't have a good handwriting.
Have you seen this before?
I've seen some other text, yes.
Do you think it's his handwriting?
I'm not sure.
I've never seen his writings.
But it's the first time you've seen this copy.
No, I haven't seen this copy.
It's very nice.
It's paper that's been dyed in India ink, and then there's a layer of shellac to make it writable, and then gold ink.
The thing is what Tracy is doing right now, putting the book on his head.
Yeah.
He puts it in his head.
That's a sign of pain.
That's a tradition.
Very good.
Excellent.
Thank you.
It's very good writing.
Now, from your standpoint,
This is what we would call a rare copy.
The text, he already knows the text.
So this text exists.
It's part of the conjure.
And many, many copies.
And everybody prints it.
Everybody knows it.
So what is significant here?
Is it the artifactual value?
The artifactual value.
It's worshipped almost.
Now the lineage is gone because the student who passed it on in his lineage
You know, his family lineage.
They died out.
Somebody said, oh, do you want this?
It's supposed to be by Getse.
Mahapandita.
Well, I've been interested in Getse Mahapandita for many, many years.
He was a great scholar.
Unfortunately, we don't have his writings.
We only have two volumes.
There's in China.
I met his incarnation.
He died in Germany?
He's in Germany?
He died in Germany.
Oh, yeah?
This went from him to one of his chief disciples, and then it was passed down in the family.
Very nice.
And how long have you been at this location?
We moved here.
It really is not even open yet.
It came here at 19.
When was it?
It was October, I guess.
So you can see the use that it's getting, and it's not even officially open.
Amazing.
How many volumes would you say we have?
20?
I don't know.
It's difficult to count.
I shipped most of the books from Cairo by post, and 25 boxes went astray, so it's still a big problem knowing what's missing.
You're missing part of the field for 80?
No, it's more than field for 80.
What I tried to do is go around the world and get microfilms and then blow them up.
That's how I got those ones that you want, Ramachay.
You see, nobody—you know, the user of something like that would come along once every ten years, I suppose, but today we found somebody who might like them.
But that's not the point.
The point's the habit, isn't it?
No.
That's right.
It's wonderful.
Wonderful story.
But if this were in Tibet, these would be properly—
They would be proper on the shelf.
We would have proper da-da.
They're in a mess right now.
In the boxes, the labels have got jammed.
We've had to do it that way.
Are there multiple copies of the same text?
No, no.
These are all different texts?
These are all different.
All different.
And most of this is material that was recovered?
Yeah.
From people who were refugees.
Right, bringing copies with them, and then finding sponsors in the extra community, many of whom were... That's what it looks like.
Amazing.
Do any of these places... That's Kumbum, isn't it?
No, no.
Oh, no.
The Gyancei Kumo, right.
You see, this is the most famous, was one of the most famous conjures, I think, in the world.
The temple.
The Gyancei temple.
This conjure was the source on which everything was copied.
Which conjure?
See how big those volumes are?
Now they're just in a big hole.
It just made me sad to see them.
You saw them?
I went to Tibet.
There's an open-air pit.
There's a big pit, and they're just crumpled up.
This is inside?
Inside the Tsongse Fort in Gyeongsang Fort.
The Chinese are doing this?
No, no.
This happened during the Cultural Revolution.
The Chinese are trying to do something now.
I mean, what this project is, it's
It has nothing to do with the Chinese.
It's just what happens when you get a cultural revolution and people don't respect what the tradition is.
But just like these blocks, it just made me so sad to see you walk around the park and see things that were priceless.
Who's selling these things for less than five dollars?
How long ago was this?
When was it?
It was a few months ago.
So in this year, 1998?
No, 1997.
1997, you were in Tibet.
I bought one.
I knew what it was from.
I knew what the name it was from.
So what do you feel when you see something like that?
But at least what's happening now is people here, now there's the opportunity to do something.
strike me as a driven person, but are you driven?
No, I'm not driven.
What explains, I mean... Being someplace at the right time, at the right, you know, sometimes you're at the right place at the right moment, you've had the right preparation.
I'm not driven by anybody.
But what is important, I think, is the efforts that are being made, not to extend it,
One of the projects now that the hire has is to go beyond this.
In Qinghai province, in Qinghai and Kanzhou provinces, there were monasteries that survived the Kosovo revolution that the Chinese government said these monasteries will not be destroyed.
These monasteries are chiefly kumbung,
and LeBran.
And so these survived.
And now the blocks, we know that the blocks are there.
So we're able to reprint them.
And we've got some out there that we can't, that have not been wrapped yet.
This is just a small sample.
But these blocks,
have recently been printed from the blocks that survived.
From the actual blocks?
From the actual blocks.
Did you pull from the blocks?
Yes.
Wow.
I thought you'd have done a photocopy or something like that, a photocopy.
No, no, but you see, the blocks are there.
That's wonderful.
And now we're able to get them.
So this is from Khumbum.
That's a print from Khumbum.
The birthplace of Tsongkapa, the founder of the church.
These are all carved by hand into wood blocks?
Yeah, just like the reverse.
So that must be a skill in its own right.
Yeah, you learn not to read.
And it's a skill that's dying out.
It's hard to believe, yeah.
Since that's traditionally been the only way texts have been reproduced, and that's dying out,
Tibetan textual preservation is having to move to completely new media.
The blocks do survive if people make sure they survive.
You have palm leaf manuscripts which look 500 years old, making it be 50 or 60 years old.
What's important about this block printing project is these blocks are kept not only just in Kumbum and Labrang, but it turns out to be a number of monasteries where they have blocks.
If we buy, and if a number of other libraries buy, then there's an incentive for people to say, hey, these are valuable.
You know, it's like having a cow.
We can milk that cow sometimes.
And we can go and say, aha, you know, a number of libraries could buy copies, and this might lead to a, you know, it might provide a fill up to the survival, in some way, of Tibetan
culture, the block printing culture, the book culture.
I really prefer the old block.
They're beautiful.
They're hard to print.
But, you know, you can only do a few of them.
The only way to save the culture is through electronic means.
But still, there has to be side by side.
You understand that and you accept that totally, right?
Right.
Another project that you were missing, one of our
most important members of our staff who've already gone to Bloomington, Pema Boom, who is a specialist on modern Tibetan literature.
Pema is not here today, but he's very interested in what is going on in modern literature.
He's creating a database of all the poetry, the poets, the novelists, the short story writers who are writing in Tibetan.
Most of them are coming out in journals.
They don't come out in... A very few come out in book form.
Where are they writing?
In Tibet?
In Tibetan.
But in Tibet, physically, where are they?
Yes, they're in Tibet.
They produce all of those things over there are journals.
Journals of modern literature, modern culture.
And one of the projects that the hire has is to collect
Cassettes.
This is actually a part.
You can get one of them, but this is the one.
Do you like it strong?
I do.
Good.
That's my preference.
That's fine, Kim.
That's great.
This is the best magazine in Chabash.
It's called Drangchar.
With a barcode, no less.
Yeah.
And what these people are trying to do is recreate.
They're trying to recreate a modern literature in Tibet.
Another great place that things are going on is in cassettes.
And CDs as well.
Yeah.
CDs!
That's amazing.
This kind of thing will mean that, you know, nobody else is collecting them.
Nobody else except B-side except you?
Yeah, right.
Because it's, you know, sort of ephemeral.
Now we have to figure out a way to preserve them, because you can't play those cassettes very often.
These aren't being preserved or saved in Tibet, either, by anyone?
They don't have the means.
So how are you getting them systematically?
Just ask people to provide them for them.
Do you have all this stuff entered?
Do you get it all cataloged?
No, there's no catalog.
Library of Congress doesn't have all this catalog.
I mean, what you'll have if you access Library of Congress or any other university library materials, what they'll have is they'll have, for example, like I said, they'll have one entry that says, you know, collective works, 12 volumes, and that's the sum total of information.
But then you have to know what's inside the human.
And it's useless unless you know what's inside.
So is this something you have to work on?
Well, it's a project that needs to be done.
It's basically called analytical cataloging.
So that somebody can say, oh, yes, I want a biography of this person.
Oh, that's my wife.
I just want to tell her.
She doesn't know where I am.
Hi.
You know, we're in 102.
We're right on the street level.
There are two 102s.
We're on the left.
That's a shame.
Where are you going?
Now?
You better get going if you're going.
Huh?
You better go now.
You won't have time.
You better go.
There's a four.
If you go there, you'll probably catch it with a six.
That would get you in Binghamton by eight.
Four hours?
Well, if you rush, you can... It's four o'clock, wasn't it?
Four o'clock?
Take a taxi and just go.
Coffee's good, Kim.
Thank you.
Okay, okay.
Kim, the coffee's wonderful.
The stronger the better.
Direct from Barcelona.
Yeah, that's wonderful.
What haven't I asked you that's important?
I don't know.
What haven't you asked?
It's important, you know.
That should be the electronic, because I think that's the way of the future.
And you obviously agree with that?
Yeah.
Being the electronic.
And again, is this
getting help from Trace as well?
Is this project?
No, no.
That's a separate project?
Yeah, this is the Trace.
Kim, you might want to say what Trace does and what it doesn't do.
I think you'd give me a little bit, but yeah.
We support projects inside Tibet and China.
I see.
So we're not doing so much support for things in other parts of the world, but once in a while, we support these kinds of things.
But our focus is primarily in support to that community living within the borders of China.
So this, even though this physically is in New York,
It has many visitors from China, for example.
I see.
So, just supporting or encouraging this sort of interchange is something we would be interested in.
And electronic media, it certainly wouldn't want to go about that.
I see.
I'll get in touch with you, and then we can explore this, I think.
Something that I found kind of an anecdote, Paul, when I was in South India at one of the major monasteries down there, Sarah,
ACIP, for example, the Asian Classics Input Project, is based out of one half of Sarah's, the May College of Sarah.
And if you go into their publishing house, it looks like you've walked into a bookstore, and there are Western-format bound books on the shelves, and you can buy them.
And I went in and bought one of all of their books, and I think it cost me maybe about 2,000 rupees, about $60.
I walked down the road to the Jay College
bookstore, and by the time I finally found it, I walked in, and in there was an entire wall of wood blocks, and six monks sit alone in a row with ink rollers and blocks and pages of books drying off of strings hanging from the ceiling.
I have tons of pictures.
And I walked in, and I said, I need to buy a copy of all of your books.
He loved that.
And the Geshe, who was in charge, just sort of clapped his hands, and everyone put down their rollers and their pages, and came over, and he said, okay.
And along the wall was a glass cabinet, and each book was in 20-page sections.
And he sat there and started calling out the names of sections.
It would be brought over, and he would hand them to a monk who would verify that all the pages were correct.
And then, when they were correct, he would say, okay, someone give me this section.
And he would put it together.
Someone give me the next section.
And they sat there, and over the course of
45 minutes built the entire library of textbooks.
Just briefly give me a little bit about your own background.
Did you come in with Gene here?
I actually was at the University of Virginia.
I got a master's in religious studies specializing in Tibetan Buddhism down there.
And my background before that was in computers.
And I've, of course, known about Gene almost since day one, showing up to study that.
Is he a legend in his own time?
He is a legend in his own time.
And about six, seven months ago, some friends of mine brought me up to New York and introduced me to Gene, and I found out what was going on, and I've been coming up here as often as possible as a consultant to help Gene out.
So, what do I need to know about the... You've given me your phone number, which is very important, and... I have my email.
And your email, so we can correspond a little bit.
And...
I think, totally, is it your goal to try and get all of this on?
Yes, one day.
That's my hope, and my hope is to have a... That's not my way.
...have a text, you know, all the text onto electronic readable formats, so that we will have easier sorting and hyperlinking text.
more accessible.
And how are you being supported?
How are you getting your funding?
We're doing small fundraisings here and there.
It's very difficult in general because everyone is voluntary basis, so we don't have anyone who is fully dedicated to working in fundraising.
And so what kind of space do you operate out of?
Is it university space or...?
No, we're right now having a small space at Margaret's Apartments.
You know, we have a small office there.
And our main project, input project, is going on in Nepal, in Tibetan refugee settlement areas.
So we did a lot of text input there by Tibetan people.
So what was the impetus for this?
Is this something that you generated?
No, no, no.
This is something Arumaj generated.
Yes.
So tell me about the spark, the light that went on over your head.
determined?
Did you look out and say, computers, maybe this is the way to do this?
Give me a little bit of thought that went into the... Yeah, I came here in the 80s, you know.
To here being, to the United States.
To the United States.
Okay.
And then I've been exposed to different computer technology and, you know, my friends like Marty and other people.
So you got involved in this through friendship, basically.
That was a question.
How did a lawyer get involved in this?
Why don't you tell them something about you and Lynn?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They're both volunteers.
Lynn works.
What does she do?
She's basically a... Now, she's talking to Marty, and we're talking about Marty and Lynn.
Yeah, that's... Lynn is my wife.
Okay.
You know, we were... I can transcribe these things, don't I?
It's a whole madness.
I'm just, you know, typically I studied philosophy in college and Bob Thurman was a professor where I went to college and I started studying Tibetan philosophy.
Became involved eventually in Buddhism.
Became a professional attorney.
My wife actually met Rinpoche.
She was also involved in Buddhism.
My wife met him.
And as we got to know him and got to understand what's needed for preserving the whole Tibetan culture and educational system, we began to work together and under Rinpoche's leadership developed these different projects.
And I, you know, my firm and I incorporated Natartha International Nonprofit Educational Corporation, which is actually a collection society in the educational system in New York.
And our goal is to, you know, collect Asian texts generally, but specific types of Tibetan texts that we're mainly focusing on now and to generally preserve Tibetan educational and cultural literature.
And also our primary goal was not only to
input text into computers, but also to help preserve any Tibetan rock.
Give me a little bit of your own background prior to this.
I was born in Tibetan refugee settlement in northern India.
You were born in a settlement?
Yes.
And that was what year?
1965, as they told me.
I don't remember.
But he was born after the people.
That's very important.
Yeah, and I grew up in the settlement in a very small village in northeast India, Sikkim, and received my monastic training and education at the Nalanda Institute, which was affiliated to Saskia University in India.
So I did the Masters under the Saskia University in Sikkim.
So you're born in a Tibetan community outside of Tibet.
Yes.
What was it that drove you to work so closely in preserving Tibetan culture?
And what was it?
I mean, clearly your family must have passed on a good deal.
We're talking about the disappearing ramas and all these others.
But certainly there was something here that was passed on
Chimi, why don't you explain who Dzogchenpello Vrimoje is, and what his relationship to Karmapa was.
Am I missing something?
I must be missing.
Another light goes out of my head.
Well, I think, of course, it's due to his father and mother, but also his previous reincarnations.
And his previous reincarnation from Dzogchenpello in Tibet is very, very, very important Lama.
And also his own
a teacher in Sikkim called Hisolamiskama, and he took care of him, he brought him up, he said, here, like you're my son, I'm like father, your duties in the future is to preserve our lineage, our culture, that's how he came in.
Then, of course, his teacher sort of passed away, but he's most eminent among the young generations, and then also he said,
Most young generation people, of course, they're all interested in their own world and government and anything like that, but he was sort of started this kind of preservation into other things.
So therefore, one, due to his previous Vinkara Lama, so therefore his duty to perform according to his previous Vinkara Lama.
Two, he was brought up by the Hisodans, the Yawakarmapa, who take care of him like sons, say, father and son, you must do.
what I inherited is.
And thirdly, then his own motivations, he feels very, very strongly to dedicate it to this culture, in spite of even he was born outside Tibet.
But his holy dharma, but he brought up in a very atmosphere of Tibet.
Any influence, when we... In our monastery, I was so speechless, you have to eat food like in Tibet.
Many people said, it's crazy what he's doing in this monastery.
He said, no, no, no, they have to carry a little thunder in the back into the monastery.
In India, they all have to carry shoes, they have to wear in the back.
He's sort of strictly brought up.
I think that is what he got into his head.
Well, you've explained it.
I've met all of you today for the first time, so I'm totally ignorant of... No, no, no, it's a different culture.
Absolutely, if I'm talking about previous lives, you'd think it might be the man who's joking.
His interest in this is more than casual, shall we say.
Yeah, absolutely.
Actually, that's a wonderful... You'll be able to help me a little bit on this if I follow.
Sure.
Because this is, I think, very important.
Very, very important.
I think this is a pretty good thank you.
Thank you very much.
And I'll be in touch.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, that's the object inside the connections.
So there, you have connections.
Is he still at the British Library?
You retired, what, three years ago?
Yeah.
Now he's devoting himself to his practice and writing.
practice of Buddhism, and based in London.
So you're here for this conference in Bloomington, is that right?
I really came here at a most...
Proficious time, didn't I?
I mean, this is... No, no, by some power higher than me.
Meeting with the Lamas of May.
That's right.
Are you going to the conference in Bloomington?
Yes, we're going on Saturday.
And what is the rubric?
What is the name of the conference?
It's the International Association of Tibetan Studies.
It holds the conference every three years, and it will be this year, we will have people from...
Western scholars, Tibetans from Tibet, Chinese from Tibet, and Tibetans from the Diaspora.
A few, right?
Yes.
Who else is coming from Dharamsala?
Just me and Lofsang.
Lofsang Shastri?
Yes, Rapsal is coming.
Rapsal.
But it's a place for them to meet, and, you know, in the future it'll be a different kind of Tibetan studies.
Yeah, yeah.
It'll be largely dominated by
by Tibetans who have the training.
Let me ask you, are you hopeful?
Are you optimistic?
Oh, more than optimistic.
In Buddhism we never think about hope.
Hope means a little doubt.
We don't talk about hope because hope implies a little bit of a doubt and there's no doubt.
There's no doubt.
That's wonderful.
I see it in type right now.
That's great.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.